Fix-debian-OS-to-install-MBI (#1885)
centreon/centreon-documentation: versioned_docs/version-22.04/reporting/installation.md

reporting server for performance & isolation reasons.

## Prerequisites

### Central Centreon server

#### Software requirements

<Tabs groupId="sync">
<TabItem value="Alma / RHEL / Oracle Linux 8" label="Alma / RHEL / Oracle Linux 8">

- Centreon Web 22.04
- Check that `date.timezone` is correctly configured in the `/etc/php.d/php.ini`
  file (same as the one returned by the `timedatectl status` command).
- Avoid using the following variables in the configuration file `/etc/my.cnf`. They interrupt the
  execution of long queries and can stop ETL or report generation jobs:
  - wait_timeout
  - interactive_timeout

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Debian 11" label="Debian 11">

- Centreon Web 22.04
- Check that `date.timezone` is correctly configured in the `/etc/php/8.0/mods-available/centreon.ini` file
  (same as the one returned by the `timedatectl status` command).
- Avoid using the following variables in the configuration file `/etc/mysql/mariadb.cnf`. They interrupt the
  execution of long queries and can stop ETL or report generation jobs:
  - wait_timeout
  - interactive_timeout

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="CentOS 7" label="CentOS 7">

- Centreon Web 22.04

> - Check that `date.timezone` is correctly configured in the `/etc/opt/rh/rh-php73/php.ini`  file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that `date.timezone` is correctly configured in the `/etc/php.ini`  file

```

  - wait_timeout
  - interactive_timeout

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Users and groups

| User                 | Group                      |
|----------------------|----------------------------|
| centreonBI (new)     | apache,centreon,centreonBI |
| apache (existing)    | centreonBI                 |

#### Description of users, umask and home directory

| User        | umask | home             |
|-------------|-------|------------------|
| centreonBI  | 0002  | /home/centreonBI |

### Dedicated reporting server

#### Hardware layer

| Number of services supervised | Minimum CPU          | RAM           |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|---------------|
| < 4 000                       | 2 CPU ( 3Ghz )       | 12Go minimum  |
| < 20 000                      | 4 CPU (3GHz) minimum | 16 Go minimum |
| >= 20 000 and < 40 000        | 4 CPU (3GHz) minimum | 24 Go minimum |
| >= 40 000 and < 100 000       | 8 CPU (3GHz) minimum | 32 Go minimum |
| > 100 000                     | > Contact Centreon   |               |

#### Storage space
Use [the following file](../assets/reporting/installation/Centreon-MBI-QuickGuide-Storage-Sizing_EN.xlsx)

> #### Partitionning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Partitioning

```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Enable extension

The menu **Administration > Extension > Manager** allows you to install the different extensions detected by Centreon. Click on the **Centreon MBI** tile to install it.

Then, download the license sent by the Centreon team to start configuring the general options.

### Configure the extension

Enter the following values in the Centreon general options

> MBI, menu *Reports > Monitoring Business Intelligence > General Options* :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MBI menu, *Reports > Monitoring Business Intelligence > General Options* :

```

| Scheduler options                                                                      | CBIS Host                  | IP address of the reporting server                                                   |
| ETL options A MariaDB database dedicated to reporting has been set up.                 | Yes                        |                                                                                      |
| Reporting widgets                                                                      | Reporting MariaDB database | IP address of the reporting base (default = IP address of the reporting server)      |

\**The connection test will not work at this point in the installation*.

### Access to the Central database

Download the license sent by the Centreon team to start configuring the general options.

<Tabs groupId="sync">
<TabItem value="Local monitoring base at the central office" label="Local monitoring base at the central office">

The MariaDB monitoring database is hosted on the central monitoring server.

> Run the command below to allow the reporting server to connect to the databases on the to the databases on the monitoring server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the command below to allow the reporting server to connect to the databases on the monitoring server.

```

```SQL
CREATE USER 'centreonbi'@'$BI_ENGINE_IP$' IDENTIFIED BY 'centreonbi';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON centreon.* TO 'centreonbi'@'$BI_ENGINE_IP$';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON centreon_storage.* TO 'centreonbi'@'$BI_ENGINE_IP$';
```

**$BI_ENGINE_IP$** : IP address of the reporting server.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

If you use MariaDB replication for your **monitoring databases**, some views
are created during the installation of Centreon MBI.
You must exclude them from replication by adding the following line to the **my.cnf**
file of the slave server or mariadb.cnf on Debian 11.

```shell
replicate-wild-ignore-table=centreon.mod_bi_%v01,centreon.mod_bi_%V01
```

Then, create the views manually on the slave server by running the following command
command line:

```bash
mysql centreon < [view_creation.sql](../assets/reporting/installation/view_creation.sql)
```

#### Debian 11 specific configuration

MariaDB must listen on all interfaces instead of listening on localhost/127.0.0.1 (default value). Edit the following file:

```shell
/etc/mysql/mariadb.conf.d/50-server.cnf
```

Set **bind-address** to **0.0.0.0** and restart **mariadb**.

```shell
systemctl restart mariadb
```

> ### Give rights to user cbis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Give rights to the cbis user

```

When you install Centreon MBI, a [user](../monitoring/basic-objects/contacts.md) named **cbis** is automatically created.
It allows the report generation engine to extract data from Centreon (using the APIs) in order to insert them in the report.
This user must [have access to all resources monitored by Centreon](../administration/access-control-lists.md) in order to extract the performance graphs for the following reports:

- Host-Graph-v2
- Hostgroup-Graph-v2.

To test the connection between the MBI reporting server and the Centreon API, use the following command to download a graph. Replace the graph parameters and timestamps, and replace XXXXXXXXX with the user's autologin token **cbis**:

```bash

> curl -XGET 'https://IP_CENTRAL/centreon/include/views/graphs/generateGraphs/generateImage.php?akey=XXXXXXXXX&username=CBIS&hostname=<nom_hôte>&service=<description-service>&start=<date_début>end=<date_fin>' --output /tmp/image.png

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl -XGET 'https://IP_CENTRAL/centreon/include/views/graphs/generateGraphs/generateImage.php?akey=XXXXXXXXX&username=CBIS&hostname=<host_name>&service=<service_description>&start=<start_date>&end=<end_date>' --output /tmp/image.png

```

100 18311  100 18311    0     0  30569      0 --:--:-- --:--:-- --:--:-- 30569
```

## Install the reporting server

### Install the packages

You must have the following information before proceeding with the installation process:

- IP/DNS of the monitoring database
- IP/DNS of the Centreon web interface
- IP/DNS of the reporting database (localhost strongly recommended)
- Access (user/password) to the reporting database
- Define and retrieve the ssh password of the centreonBI user, on the Central server (for the availability of the reports generated on the interface)

To start installing the reporting server, install the MBI repository. You can find it on the [support portal](https://support.centreon.com/s/repositories).

Then run the following command:

<Tabs groupId="sync">
<TabItem value="RHEL 8" label="RHEL 8">

Enable codeready-builder repositories:

```shell
subscription-manager repos --enable codeready-builder-for-rhel-8-x86_64-rpms
```

Then launch the installation:

```shell
dnf install centreon-bi-reporting-server MariaDB-server MariaDB-client
```

In the case of an installation based on a blank distribution, install the GPG key:

```shell
cd /etc/pki/rpm-gpg/

> wget hhttps://yum-gpg.centreon.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-CES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wget https://yum-gpg.centreon.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-CES

```

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Oracle Linux 8" label="Oracle Linux 8">

Enable codeready-builder repositories:

```shell
dnf config-manager --set-enabled ol8_codeready_builder
```

Then launch the installation:

```shell
dnf install centreon-bi-reporting-server MariaDB-server MariaDB-client
```

In the case of an installation based on a blank distribution, install the GPG key:

```shell
cd /etc/pki/rpm-gpg/

> wget hhttps://yum-gpg.centreon.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-CES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wget https://yum-gpg.centreon.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-CES

```

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Alma 8" label="Alma 8">

Enable powertools repositories:

```shell
dnf config-manager --set-enabled 'powertools'
```

Then launch the installation:

```shell
dnf install centreon-bi-reporting-server MariaDB-server MariaDB-client
```

In the case of an installation based on a blank distribution, install the GPG key:

```shell
cd /etc/pki/rpm-gpg/

> wget hhttps://yum-gpg.centreon.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-CES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wget https://yum-gpg.centreon.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-CES

```

systemctl restart mariadb
```

> If the MariaDB service fails at the time of starting, remove the files *ib_logfile*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the MariaDB service fails to start, remove the files *ib_logfile*
```

| First day of the week                                                                  | Select the first day of the week for Week aggregation.                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Centile / Timeperiod combination                                                       | Create a new centile/timeperiod combination on which to perform the calculation.                                                                                                                                                      |

**(1)** Reports requiring data granularity by the hour are listed below. 
If you do not wish to use these reports, disable the calculation of hourly statistics:

> - Hotsgroup-Host-details-1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Hostgroup-Host-details-1

```

![image](../assets/reporting/installation/bi_retention.png)

To enable automatic purging of old data, edit the cron file **/etc/cron.d/centreon-bi-purge**
on the reporting server, then uncomment the following line:

```shell
#0 20 * * * root @CENTREON_BI_HOME@/*etl*/dataRetentionManager.pl >> @CENTREON_BI_LOG@/dataRetentionManager.log 2>&1
```

Avoid scheduled periods for statistical calculations with Centreon MBI ETL and report generation.
You can run this cron daily or weekly, depending on the batch execution time and the load generated on the server.

<Tabs groupId="sync">
<TabItem value="Alma / RHEL / Oracle Linux 8 / RHEL 7 / CentOS 7" label="Alma / RHEL / Oracle Linux 8 / RHEL 7 / CentOS 7">

Restart the cron service:

```shell
systemctl restart crond
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Debian 11" label="Debian 11">

Restart the cron service:

```shell
systemctl restart cron
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

**BEST PRACTICES** : Select different retention periods depending on the granularity of the statistical data:

- Aggregated values per hour are used to analyze a metric over a short period of time, they take up a lot of disk space. You may not

>   need to keep these keep these statistics for more than two or three months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  need to keep these statistics for more than two or three months.

```
